# Cold-related death claim assessment  


The article “Cold-related Mortality Dwarfs Heat-related Mortality in Portugal” from the Center for the Study of Carbon Dioxide and Global Change (2021) reviews a recent paper that suggests cold weather poses far greater risks than heat. This rhetoric aligns with the climate skeptic beliefs that climate change does not pose any imminent risk for human life as we know it, despite extensive research suggesting otherwise. 

The article begins by explaining that cold weather is far deadlier than hot weather. This continues to a review of the paper “Modelling climate change impacts on attributable-related deaths and demographic changes in the largest metropolitan area in Portugal: A time-series analysis”, which looks at daily variation in temperature and overall mortality near Lisbon, Portugal (Rodrigues, Santana and Rocha, 2020). Rodrigues, Santana and Rocha (2020) find that cold weather poses a far greater risk as indicated by the thirty-day cumulative relative risks of mortality compared to temperature; essentially, the proportion of deaths from cold weather are far greater than hot weather (Rodrigues, Santana and Rocha, 2020). Based on these findings, the main article suggests that cold-related deaths should be the focus of research and policy (Center for the Study of Carbon Dioxide and Global Change, 2021). 

This paper, however, does not tell the complete story; while cold-related deaths are undeniably dangerous, the decrease of cold-related deaths does not account for the increase of heat-related deaths (US EPA a, 2017). Increased greenhouse gas concentrations lead to higher average and extreme temperatures, which will result in premature heat-related deaths (USGCRP, 2016). Abnormally hot summers and record-breaking heat waves have been in a steady upward trend, which results in increased heat-related deaths (US EPA b, 2016). Given that heat-related deaths are often publicized extensively to show the extent of climate change’s impact, this is an extremely relevant subject. 

This claim does bring up some good points about cold-related deaths decreasing with climate. The article would appear to target a general audience with some basic science understanding, seeing as it does explain the statistical analysis of the original paper; however, it does appear to be advocating for a climate change skeptic perspective. The author is not stated explicitly, but the website is for the Center for the Study of Carbon Dioxide and Global Change. Its mission statement is to determine the impacts of increasing carbon dioxide by separating the emotional aspect from global change. The website and its graphics do not suggest that this is a scholarly or organization website, but rather a more personal blog based on the organization and overall content. 

The information in this post does come from a peer reviewed journal and contain relevant statistics that show how the cumulative relative risk of temperature is greater at low temperatures. The post was published in 2021 based on research from 2020, so the data is not out-dated. While the primary source from Rodrigues, Santana and Rocha (2020) finds that there are more cold-related deaths than heat-related deaths in the Lisbon area, this is not satisfactory evidence to support the claim that policy should aim to minimize cold weather deaths instead of focusing on climate-change driven heat-related deaths. Additional sources and a wider sample area would be required to satisfactorily support the claims. 

Increased mortality associated with cold weather does not indicate a direct correlation to heat-related deaths being unimportant; rather, both factors would need to be considered from an impartial perspective. Claiming that cold-related deaths prove that policies should shift away from global warming is not a plausible claim based on the limited data provided, despite analysis indicating that cold-related mortality also poses a threat. 

**Works Cited**

Center for the Study of Carbon Dioxide and Global Change, 2021. Cold-related Mortality Dwarfs Heat-related Mortality in Portugal. [online] CO2 Science. Available at: <http://www.co2science.org/articles/V24/jan/a4.php>.

Rodrigues, M., Santana, P. and Rocha, A., 2020. Modelling climate change impacts on attributable-related deaths and demographic changes in the largest metropolitan area in Portugal: A time-series analysis. Environmental Research, 190, p.109998. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2020.109998.

US EPA a, O., 2017. Climate Change Indicators: Cold-Related Deaths. [Reports and Assessments] Available at: <https://www.epa.gov/climate-indicators/climate-change-indicators-cold-related-deaths> [Accessed 18 Oct. 2021].

US EPA b, O., 2016. Climate Change Indicators: Heat-Related Deaths. [Reports and Assessments] Available at: <https://www.epa.gov/climate-indicators/climate-change-indicators-heat-related-deaths> [Accessed 18 Oct. 2021].

USGCRP, 2016. The Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States: A Scientific Assessment. [online] U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC.pp.1–312. Available at: <https://health2016.globalchange.gov/executive-summary.html> [Accessed 18 Oct. 2021].
